README.md, before:

# Docker Lab
Please note, this tutorial requires you to have Docker Community Edition installed on your computer.  Get it [here](https://www.docker.com/community-edition).

---
## 1. Docker Hello World
Please note: if it seems like a lot is being introduced right off the bat, it's just to expose you to it.  We will be exploring everything touched on here in greater details as the tutorial proceeds.

On the command line, type in:
```
docker run hello-world
```

You will see the following output:
```
Hello from Docker!
This message shows that your installation appears to be working correctly.

To generate this message, Docker took the following steps:
 1. The Docker client contacted the Docker daemon.
 2. The Docker daemon pulled the "hello-world" image from the Docker Hub.
    (amd64)
 3. The Docker daemon created a new container from that image which runs the
    executable that produces the output you are currently reading.
 4. The Docker daemon streamed that output to the Docker client, which sent it
    to your terminal.

To try something more ambitious, you can run an Ubuntu container with:
 $ docker run -it ubuntu bash

Share images, automate workflows, and more with a free Docker ID:
 https://cloud.docker.com/

For more examples and ideas, visit:
 https://docs.docker.com/engine/userguide/
 ```
 
The description of what happened is a pretty good summary.  But here are some more details:
1. The Docker client, invoked via the command line contacts the Docker daemon running on your system.
2. The Docker daemon pulls the "hello-world" image.
   * Docker is by default configured to search Docker Hub for images, as opposed to say, your organization's private repo.
   * In order to specify a tag for an image, you would append the tag name with a colon after the image name, such as
     ```docker run hello-world:linux```
     If you do not specify a tag, then Docker will treat it as if you requested the "latest" version of the image, as in
     ```docker run hello-world:latest```
     The "latest" tag is what Docker automatically tags images with when you do not explicitly provide one at build time.
     ```docker build my-container``` is equivalent to ```docker build my-container:latest```.  We will explore well-known problems with the "latest" tag in a bit.
3. The Docker daemon creates a new container based on the "hello-world" image, and starts it.  In fact, the ```docker run``` command is a shorthand for two commands: ```docker create``` (which instantiates the container from the image) and ```docker start <image>``` (which actually runs it).
4. The Docker daemon streams the output to the Docker client, which in turn sends it to your CLI.  By default, Docker will stream a container's output to your terminal.  You can ensure that Docker does not output to your terminal by using the -d or --detach flag, as in: ```docker run -d hello-world```.  You can think of the default as running a command in linux, outputting to the terminal vs. appending the command with an ampersand, which backgrounds the process and does not attach its output to your terminal.  i.e. ```top``` vs. ```top &```.

---
## 2. Docker Hub
Here is the URL for the Docker Hub page for the hello-world image (this page is its "repository"): https://hub.docker.com/_/hello-world/  -- It is worth familiarising yourself with the layout and content of Docker Hub pages.

![Docker Hub](/images/dockerhub.png)

1. I find the _Tags_ page to be a much better and clearer listing of a repository's tags.  Those in the _Full Description_ section are manually entered while those on the _Tags_ page come from Docker itself.
![Docker Hub Tags page](/images/dockerhubtags.png)
2. You are always provided with the command needed to pull an image, similar to how you can get a git repo's link to clone it locally.
3. The _Full Description_ will provide a lot of interesting details about images.  It is common for the repository's maintainers to provide links to the Dockerfile(s) used to create the image.  This is in keeping with the open-source nature of a lot of Docker work - you can see for yourself exactly what is and is not in an image.  The content and quality of the _Full Description_ is going to vary by the maintainer(s).  My experience has been that "official" repos for products, e.g. Docker-related repos, Redis, Wordpress, etc. tend to have the best documentation.

---
## 3. A Taste of the Power of Docker
1. Run the following command to clone the specified git repo to your local host:
```git clone https://github.com/spkane/wearebigchill.git --config core.autocrlf=input```
2. Change into the new folder: ```cd wearebigchill```
3. Build the Docker image: ```docker build .```
   [Click here](/outputs/wearebigchill-docker-build-output.txt) for the output that you ought to be seeing from this command.
   The output will end with the following line: ```Successfully built 49aee06e8e38```. Your image id will differ from ```49aee06e8e38```.  You will need this id for the next command.
4. Run the docker image: ```docker run -p 8090:80 <image ID from previous step>```.
5. Go to [http://localhost:8090](http://localhost:8090) in your browser and try the game out for a spin.  Try not to mind the very suspect physics.  
6. Admire how dead simple it actually was to start up a web server that serves up this "game".  
7. Go back to your terminal and hit ```ctrl+c``` to stop the container.
8. Restart the container, this time specifying an environment variable (more on this in a bit): ```docker run -p 8090:80 -e "THEME=2" <same image ID>```
9. Refresh [http://localhost:8090](http://localhost:8090) and observe how it has changed.  You may need to open it in a private browsing window instead to avoid the browser cache loading up the previous version of the app.

Bottom line: Docker makes it incredibly easy to distribute software that "just runs" on any system (that has Docker).  It is also extremely simple to configure the behaviour of your apps for different environments and situations.  There are other ways to modify a container's configuration besides the setting of environment variables via the -e command.

---
## 4. An Aside on the Creation of Images
This section explores some (in my opinion) interesting details about how Docker goes about creating images.  It is not strictly necessary in order to use Docker, but I think it helps understand what images are and how they are formed.
Here is a subset of the output from the ```docker build .``` command in the ```wearebigchill``` project folder:
```Step 1/13 : FROM fedora:22
   ---> 01a9fe974dba
        
   ...
        
   Step 11/13 : ENV THEME 1
   ---> Running in 485f1c9d017c
   Removing intermediate container 485f1c9d017c
   ---> b3d9e3838d1
   Step 12/13 : EXPOSE 80
   ---> Running in 7b0a55e4a76b
   Removing intermediate container 7b0a55e4a76b
   ---> 3a348f8ca063
```
So what is going on here?  Some interesting things to note:
1. Docker builds up images in an incremental, back and forth fashion:
   1. An image is instantiated as an "intermediate container".
      * Step 12/13 instantiates the image layer ```b3d9e3838d1``` from Step 11/13.  This intermediate container has an id of ```7b0a55e4a76b```.
   2. A command is executed in that container to change its state in some desired way (changing contents, variables, etc.).
      * In Step 12/13 this command is ```EXPOSE 80```, which tells Docker to expose port 80 on the app to the host OS (More on this in a bit).
   3. A snapshot of the container after step b is captured as a new image.  
      * After executing the EXPOSE 80 command in the intermediate container, Docker captures this new state as a new image layer: ```---> 3a348f8ca063```
   4. Go back to step a until you have reached the end of your Docker commands.
2. The first image layer we see is 01a9fe974dba as part of Step 1/13.  This layer is populated by the FROM fedora:22 command, which means "Start with fedora:22 as my base image to build upon."  You always have to start with a FROM command, to specify what to start from.  If you actually want to start an entirely new image, you would specify FROM scratch, which is an empty image.  For what it is worth, it is exceedingly unlikely that we would ever need to do this -- there is always going to be an image that has done much of the groundwork for us to build upon.
3. Docker will remove intermediate containers, e.g. ```Removing intermediate container 7b0a55e4a76b```.  It is not clear to me at this time why Docker does not display this message for ```ADD``` commands.
4. The ID for the final container -- what you actually want out of this whole process -- is displayed at the end: ```Successfully built 49aee06e8e38```.  We will learn about how to give images more human-friendly names later.

---
## 5. So Where Do Images Come From Anyway?

Dockerfiles!

If you open the Dockerfile inside of the ```wearebigchill``` directory, it looks like the following:
```FROM fedora:22
   
   RUN dnf install -y httpd
   RUN mkdir /var/www/html/res && \
       mkdir /theme1 && \
       mkdir /theme2
   ADD httpd.conf /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf
   ADD publish/html5/theme1/* /theme1/
   ADD publish/html5/theme2/* /theme2/
   ADD publish/html5/game.min.js /var/www/html/
   ADD publish/html5/index.html /var/www/html/
   ADD publish/html5/project.json /var/www/html/
   ADD start.sh /
   ENV THEME 1

   EXPOSE 80

   CMD ["/start.sh"]
```
If you look back at the output of the docker build process in the wearebigchill folder [here](/outputs/wearebigchill-docker-build-output.txt) you should see some striking similarities between the Dockerfile and that output.

### An aside
Every Docker command (RUN, ADD, ENV, etc.) results in an additional layer being added to your image.  Certainly at our level of Docker it's not as critical to be hyper vigilant, but in general it is a best practice to reduce the number of commands/layers that go into your Dockerfiles/images.  One way to do this can be observed above where the second RUN command actually uses linux's ability to chain different command line invocations into the same command.  That command COULD be:
```
RUN mkdir /var/www/html/res 
RUN mkdir /theme1
RUN mkdir /theme2
```
...but this is discouraged because a new layer will be added for each separate RUN command and this makes your resulting images larger.  This in turn is undesirable because it means more bandwidth is required to download and deploy your Docker images to servers or anywhere else.

- [ ] Add in information about multi-stage builds here?

### Back to our regularly scheduled programming...
Dockerfiles consist of COMMANDS and the content for said COMMANDS, in the format ```<COMMAND> <CONTENT>```
In this particular file, there are 6 different types of commands:
1. FROM
2. RUN
3. ADD
4. ENV
5. EXPOSE
6. CMD



---
## 6. Exploring Containers

Docker allows you to execute arbitrary commands inside of already-running containers.  This can be useful for debugging containers, but is generally frowned upon for production purposes.  It is considered a best practice that

Commit message:

Start filling in details for Dockerfile commands

README.md, after:

# Docker Lab
Please note, this tutorial requires you to have Docker Community Edition installed on your computer.  Get it [here](https://www.docker.com/community-edition).

---
## 1. Docker Hello World
Please note: if it seems like a lot is being introduced right off the bat, it's just to expose you to it.  We will be exploring everything touched on here in greater details as the tutorial proceeds.

On the command line, type in:
```
docker run hello-world
```

You will see the following output:
```
Hello from Docker!
This message shows that your installation appears to be working correctly.

To generate this message, Docker took the following steps:
 1. The Docker client contacted the Docker daemon.
 2. The Docker daemon pulled the "hello-world" image from the Docker Hub.
    (amd64)
 3. The Docker daemon created a new container from that image which runs the
    executable that produces the output you are currently reading.
 4. The Docker daemon streamed that output to the Docker client, which sent it
    to your terminal.

To try something more ambitious, you can run an Ubuntu container with:
 $ docker run -it ubuntu bash

Share images, automate workflows, and more with a free Docker ID:
 https://cloud.docker.com/

For more examples and ideas, visit:
 https://docs.docker.com/engine/userguide/
 ```
 
The description of what happened is a pretty good summary.  But here are some more details:
1. The Docker client, invoked via the command line contacts the Docker daemon running on your system.
2. The Docker daemon pulls the "hello-world" image.
   * Docker is by default configured to search Docker Hub for images, as opposed to say, your organization's private repo.
   * In order to specify a tag for an image, you would append the tag name with a colon after the image name, such as
     ```docker run hello-world:linux```
     If you do not specify a tag, then Docker will treat it as if you requested the "latest" version of the image, as in
     ```docker run hello-world:latest```
     The "latest" tag is what Docker automatically tags images with when you do not explicitly provide one at build time.
     ```docker build my-container``` is equivalent to ```docker build my-container:latest```.  We will explore well-known problems with the "latest" tag in a bit.
3. The Docker daemon creates a new container based on the "hello-world" image, and starts it.  In fact, the ```docker run``` command is a shorthand for two commands: ```docker create``` (which instantiates the container from the image) and ```docker start <image>``` (which actually runs it).
4. The Docker daemon streams the output to the Docker client, which in turn sends it to your CLI.  By default, Docker will stream a container's output to your terminal.  You can ensure that Docker does not output to your terminal by using the -d or --detach flag, as in: ```docker run -d hello-world```.  You can think of the default as running a command in linux, outputting to the terminal vs. appending the command with an ampersand, which backgrounds the process and does not attach its output to your terminal.  i.e. ```top``` vs. ```top &```.

---
## 2. Docker Hub
Here is the URL for the Docker Hub page for the hello-world image (this page is its "repository"): https://hub.docker.com/_/hello-world/  -- It is worth familiarising yourself with the layout and content of Docker Hub pages.

![Docker Hub](/images/dockerhub.png)

1. I find the _Tags_ page to be a much better and clearer listing of a repository's tags.  Those in the _Full Description_ section are manually entered while those on the _Tags_ page come from Docker itself.
![Docker Hub Tags page](/images/dockerhubtags.png)
2. You are always provided with the command needed to pull an image, similar to how you can get a git repo's link to clone it locally.
3. The _Full Description_ will provide a lot of interesting details about images.  It is common for the repository's maintainers to provide links to the Dockerfile(s) used to create the image.  This is in keeping with the open-source nature of a lot of Docker work - you can see for yourself exactly what is and is not in an image.  The content and quality of the _Full Description_ is going to vary by the maintainer(s).  My experience has been that "official" repos for products, e.g. Docker-related repos, Redis, Wordpress, etc. tend to have the best documentation.

---
## 3. A Taste of the Power of Docker
1. Run the following command to clone the specified git repo to your local host:
```git clone https://github.com/spkane/wearebigchill.git --config core.autocrlf=input```
2. Change into the new folder: ```cd wearebigchill```
3. Build the Docker image: ```docker build .```
   [Click here](/outputs/wearebigchill-docker-build-output.txt) for the output that you ought to be seeing from this command.
   The output will end with the following line: ```Successfully built 49aee06e8e38```. Your image id will differ from ```49aee06e8e38```.  You will need this id for the next command.
4. Run the docker image: ```docker run -p 8090:80 <image ID from previous step>```.
5. Go to [http://localhost:8090](http://localhost:8090) in your browser and try the game out for a spin.  Try not to mind the very suspect physics.  
6. Admire how dead simple it actually was to start up a web server that serves up this "game".  
7. Go back to your terminal and hit ```ctrl+c``` to stop the container.
8. Restart the container, this time specifying an environment variable (more on this in a bit): ```docker run -p 8090:80 -e "THEME=2" <same image ID>```
9. Refresh [http://localhost:8090](http://localhost:8090) and observe how it has changed.  You may need to open it in a private browsing window instead to avoid the browser cache loading up the previous version of the app.

Bottom line: Docker makes it incredibly easy to distribute software that "just runs" on any system (that has Docker).  It is also extremely simple to configure the behaviour of your apps for different environments and situations.  There are other ways to modify a container's configuration besides the setting of environment variables via the -e command.

---
## 4. An Aside on the Creation of Images
This section explores some (in my opinion) interesting details about how Docker goes about creating images.  It is not strictly necessary in order to use Docker, but I think it helps understand what images are and how they are formed.
Here is a subset of the output from the ```docker build .``` command in the ```wearebigchill``` project folder:
```Step 1/13 : FROM fedora:22
   ---> 01a9fe974dba
        
   ...
        
   Step 11/13 : ENV THEME 1
   ---> Running in 485f1c9d017c
   Removing intermediate container 485f1c9d017c
   ---> b3d9e3838d1
   Step 12/13 : EXPOSE 80
   ---> Running in 7b0a55e4a76b
   Removing intermediate container 7b0a55e4a76b
   ---> 3a348f8ca063
```
So what is going on here?  Some interesting things to note:
1. Docker builds up images in an incremental, back and forth fashion:
   1. An image is instantiated as an "intermediate container".
      * Step 12/13 instantiates the image layer ```b3d9e3838d1``` from Step 11/13.  This intermediate container has an id of ```7b0a55e4a76b```.
   2. A command is executed in that container to change its state in some desired way (changing contents, variables, etc.).
      * In Step 12/13 this command is ```EXPOSE 80```, which tells Docker to expose port 80 on the app to the host OS (More on this in a bit).
   3. A snapshot of the container after step b is captured as a new image.  
      * After executing the EXPOSE 80 command in the intermediate container, Docker captures this new state as a new image layer: ```---> 3a348f8ca063```
   4. Go back to step a until you have reached the end of your Docker commands.
2. The first image layer we see is 01a9fe974dba as part of Step 1/13.  This layer is populated by the FROM fedora:22 command, which means "Start with fedora:22 as my base image to build upon."  You always have to start with a FROM command, to specify what to start from.  If you actually want to start an entirely new image, you would specify FROM scratch, which is an empty image.  For what it is worth, it is exceedingly unlikely that we would ever need to do this -- there is always going to be an image that has done much of the groundwork for us to build upon.
3. Docker will remove intermediate containers, e.g. ```Removing intermediate container 7b0a55e4a76b```.  It is not clear to me at this time why Docker does not display this message for ```ADD``` commands.
4. The ID for the final container -- what you actually want out of this whole process -- is displayed at the end: ```Successfully built 49aee06e8e38```.  We will learn about how to give images more human-friendly names later.

---
## 5. So Where Do Images Come From Anyway?

Dockerfiles!

If you open the Dockerfile inside of the ```wearebigchill``` directory, it looks like the following:
```FROM fedora:22
   
   RUN dnf install -y httpd
   RUN mkdir /var/www/html/res && \
       mkdir /theme1 && \
       mkdir /theme2
   ADD httpd.conf /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf
   ADD publish/html5/theme1/* /theme1/
   ADD publish/html5/theme2/* /theme2/
   ADD publish/html5/game.min.js /var/www/html/
   ADD publish/html5/index.html /var/www/html/
   ADD publish/html5/project.json /var/www/html/
   ADD start.sh /
   ENV THEME 1

   EXPOSE 80

   CMD ["/start.sh"]
```
If you look back at the output of the docker build process in the wearebigchill folder [here](/outputs/wearebigchill-docker-build-output.txt) you should see some striking similarities between the Dockerfile and that output.

### An aside
Every Docker command (RUN, ADD, ENV, etc.) results in an additional layer being added to your image.  Certainly at our level of Docker it's not as critical to be hyper vigilant, but in general it is a best practice to reduce the number of commands/layers that go into your Dockerfiles/images.  One way to do this can be observed above where the second RUN command actually uses linux's ability to chain different command line invocations into the same command.  That command COULD be:
```
RUN mkdir /var/www/html/res 
RUN mkdir /theme1
RUN mkdir /theme2
```
...but this is discouraged because a new layer will be added for each separate RUN command and this makes your resulting images larger.  This in turn is undesirable because it means more bandwidth is required to download and deploy your Docker images to servers or anywhere else.

- [ ] Add in information about multi-stage builds here?

### Back to our regularly scheduled programming...
Dockerfiles consist of commands and the content for said commands, in the format ```<COMMAND> <CONTENT>```
In this particular file, there are 6 different types of commands:

1. FROM <image>
This instructs Docker what image to use as a start.  Depending on your needs, you could, for instance, start with different flavours    of linux (FROM [alpine](https://hub.docker.com/_/alpine/), FROM [centos](https://hub.docker.com/_/centos/), FROM [debian](https://hub.docker.com/_/debian/), etc.), or start with an image that already has some kind of runtime or technology that you want your container to feature (FROM [openjdk](https://hub.docker.com/_/openjdk/), FROM [python](https://hub.docker.com/_/python/), FROM [ruby](https://hub.docker.com/_/ruby/), etc.).  Alpine linux (FROM alpine) is generally a safe bet for a generic image to start from.  It is a very slimmed down distribution of linux intended for use in Docker containers.  A best practice is to specify a version tag on an image to build from, e.g. ```FROM alpine:3.7``` because otherwise you are at the mercy of whatever the latest tag gets updated to point to, which might change something unexpectedly.

2. RUN <linux command>
This runs a linux command, the results of which then become part of your image.  So ```RUN mkdir /var/www/html/res``` will create the specified directory within the container.  ```RUN apt-get install vim``` would install the greatest text editor in the universe onto a Ubuntu-based image.  As noted in the aside above, keep an eye out for the opportunity to combine RUN commands to reduce the number of layers required to build your image and reduce its size.

3. ADD <file on host> <location in container to put it>
The ADD command lets you copy files from your host OS into the container.  This is really useful for getting assets, configuration or properties files, shell scripts, or indeed your artifact itself (e.g. your Spring Boot JAR) into the container.

4. ENV
5. EXPOSE
6. CMD




---
## 6. Exploring Containers

Docker allows you to execute arbitrary commands inside of already-running containers.  This can be useful for debugging containers, but is generally frowned upon for production purposes.  It is considered a best practice that
